LLaMA in TF/Keras (#213)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2023-05-24-llama-tensorflow-keras/llama-tensorflow-keras.Rmd

---
title: "LLaMA in R with Keras and TensorFlow"
description: >

>   Walk-through an implementation of LLaMA in R

Reviewer: Hesitating to make suggestions to a "much more native" speaker, but this sounds a bit strange to me... Maybe add "of", or make a complete sentence of it? "This post walks ..."

  with TensorFlow and Keras.
author:
  - name: Tomasz Kalinowski

>     affiliation: RStudio

Reviewer: guess this should be Posit :-)

    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: kalinowskillama
date: 2023-05-24
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
categories:
  - TensorFlow/Keras
  - R
  - Generative Models
  - Natural Language Processing
preview: images/preview.png
---

> OpenAI’s chatGPT has awakened a collective awareness of what Large

Reviewer: "awaken awareness" sounds strange to me, - "create"?

Language Models (LLMs) are capable of. With that awakening comes a daily
march of LLM news: new products, new features, new models, new

> capabilities, (and new worries). It seems we’re in the early parts of a

Reviewer: leave out the comma?

Reviewer: (because parens)

> cambrian explosion of LLMs and LLM powered tools; it’s not yet clear how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cambrian explosion of LLMs and LLM powered tools; it’s not yet clear how
```

it seems clear that they will, in some way.

Since LLMs are here to stay, it’s worthwhile to take some time to
understand how these models work from a first-principles perspective.
Starting with the mechanics can help foster durable intuitions that will
inform our usage of these models now and in the future. (Especially if
the future is one where LLMs are a staple of the data scientist’s
toolbox, as common as an `lm()` function call).

And what better way is there to learn than by doing. So with that
preamble, in this post we’ll walk through an implementation of an LLM,
[LLaMA](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971)  [@touvron2023]
specifically, in TensorFlow and Keras, with the goal being to develop
understanding first, capability second.

Why LLaMA? With the sheer volume of LLM related content and news out
there, it can seem daunting to know where to get started. Almost weekly
it seems there is a new model announced. Browsing some hubs of LLM
activity ([HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/models),
[TFHub](https://tfhub.dev/s?module-type=text-language-model),
[reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/deeplearning/),
[HackerNews](https://hn.algolia.com/?q=LLM)) muddies the waters even

> more. How to pick?

Reviewer: maybe add "a specific model"?

Of the many LLM-related news items in the past months, one that stands
head-and-shoulders above the crowd is the [release of
LLaMA](https://ai.facebook.com/blog/large-language-model-llama-meta-ai/),
a modern, foundational LLM made available to the public by Meta AI in
Februay 2023. On common benchmarks, LLaMA outperforms OpenAI’s GPT-3,
while being substantially smaller (though still *large*).

LLaMA is a great starting place because it is a simple and modern
architecture, has excellent performance on benchmarks, and is open. The

> model architecture has just a few new ideas incorporated into it since

Reviewer: "has had"?

“[Attention Is All You Need](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762)”
published from Google [@vaswani2017attention]. Four different sizes of
LLaMA have been released: 7 billion and 13 billion parameter models
trained on 1 Trillion tokens, and 33 billion and 65 billion parameter
models trained on 1.4 trillion tokens. This is an enormous amount of
training data these models have seen–the largest 65B model has been
trained on approximately the [“Chinchilla
compute-optimum”](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556) [@hoffmann2022training]
number of tokens, while the smaller LLaMAs are substantially
beyond that optimum. In this blog post we’ll focus on the smallest, 7B
parameter LLaMA model, which you can comfortably load locally and run on
CPU with only 64Gb of RAM.

While not strictly necessary, to follow along locally, you’ll probably
want to acquire the pre-trained LLaMA weights [one
way](https://forms.gle/jk851eBVbX1m5TAv5) or
[another](https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama/pull/73). Note, the
weights do come with their own license, which you can preview
[here](https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama/pull/234).

So, without further ado, let’s get started.

### Setup

> First, we’ll want to install the required R and python packages, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we’ll want to install the required R and Python packages, and
```

configure a virtual environment:

``` r
remotes::install_github(c("rstudio/reticulate",
                          "rstudio/tensorflow",
                          "rstudio/keras"))
reticulate::virtualenv_create("./.venv", version = "3.10")
tensorflow::install_tensorflow(envname = "./.venv", version = "release")
```

With that out of the way, let’s load some packages and prepare our R
session:

``` r
library(purrr)
library(envir)

library(tensorflow)
library(tfautograph)
library(keras)

use_virtualenv("./.venv")
options(tensorflow.extract.warn_tensors_passed_asis = FALSE)

attach_eval({
  import_from(glue, glue)
  import_from(jsonlite, read_json)
  import_from(keras$layers, Dense)
  np <- reticulate::import("numpy", convert = FALSE)

  seq_len0 <- function(x) seq.int(from = 0L, length.out = x)
})
```

If you’ve acquired the pre-trained weights, it’ll be convenient to
convert them from the torch checkpoint format to something that’s more

> framework agnostic (you only need to do this once of course):

Reviewer: comma? (", of course")

  add_bos = TRUE, add_eos = FALSE,
)
```

Let’s test it out with a prompt:

``` r
prompt <- "The best way to attract bees"
tokenizer$tokenize(prompt)
```

    tf.Tensor([    1   450  1900   982   304 13978   367   267], shape=(8), dtype=int32)

``` r
prompt |> tokenizer$tokenize() |> tokenizer$detokenize()
```

    tf.Tensor(b'The best way to attract bees', shape=(), dtype=string)

Let’s define a `show_tokens()` helper function and play with the
tokenizer a little.

``` r
show_tokens <- function(what) {
  if(is.character(what))
    token_ids <- what |> tokenizer$tokenize() |> as.integer()
  else
    token_ids <- as.integer(what)
  tokens <- token_ids |>
    map_chr(function(id) {
      id |>
        as_tensor(shape = c(1)) |>
        tokenizer$detokenize() |>
        as.character()
    })

  names(tokens) <- token_ids
  tokens
}

show_tokens(prompt)
```

            1       450      1900       982       304     13978       367       267
           ""     "The"    "best"     "way"      "to" "attract"      "be"      "es"

Note that “bees” is two tokens. Not every token corresponds to a word.
For example, one non-word token we can reliably expect to show up in a

> tokenizer trained on a corpus of english text is “ing”. However when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tokenizer trained on a corpus of English text is “ing”. However when the
```

> tokenizer trained on a corpus of english text is “ing”. However when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tokenizer trained on a corpus of english text is “ing”. However, _when_ the
```

“ing” token shows up will not always follow your intuitions, because
common words get their own token id, even if they can be decomposed into
multiple tokens.

``` r
show_tokens("ing")
```

        1  2348
       "" "ing"

``` r
show_tokens("working")
```

            1      1985
           "" "working"

``` r
show_tokens("flexing")
```

         1   8525    292
        "" "flex"  "ing"

``` r
show_tokens("wonking")
```

         1   2113   9292
        ""  "won" "king"

Another thing to note about the tokenizer is that each token sequence

> starts with token id `1`. This is a special *beginning-of-sequence*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starts with token id `1`. This is a special *begin-of-sequence*
```

    self$attention <- Attention(attn_head_size, attn_n_heads,
                                block_id = block_id)

    self$feed_forward <- FeedForward(
      hidden_dim = 4 * attn_head_size * attn_n_heads,
      block_id = block_id)

    self$attention_norm <- RMSNorm(eps = norm_eps,
                                   block_id = block_id,
                                   feeds_into = "attention")
    self$feed_forward_norm <- RMSNorm(eps = norm_eps,
                                      block_id = block_id,
                                      feeds_into = "ffn")
  }

  call <- function(x) {

    # norm and attention
    x2 <- x |>
      self$attention_norm() |>
      self$attention()

    x <- x + x2 # add residual

    # norm and swiglu
    x2 <- x %>%
      self$feed_forward_norm() %>%
      self$feed_forward()

    x <- x + x2 # residual again

    x
  }
}
```

While there is not a lot of code, there are a lot of ideas packed in
there. This block forms the main trunk of the model, so it’s worth
taking the time to go through it slowly.

We implement the `TransformerBlock` as a subclassed
`keras.layers.Layer`. This is gives us some niceties like the ability to

> compose with other keras layers, but these are mostly orthogonal for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compose with other keras layers, but these are mostly irrelevant to the
```

purpose of this blog post; we could just as easily implement this as,
for example, a vanilla R6 class. Our `TransformerBlock` class has two
methods: `initialize`, called when we first create the block, and
`call`, called when we run the forward pass of the block.

In `initialize`, we create 4 layers: an `Attention` layer, a
`FeedForward` layer, and 2 `RMSNorm` layers. We’ll take a close look at
each of these soon, but even before we do so, we can see how they fit
together by looking at the `TransformerBlock$call()` method.

The `call` method has a few simple ideas. In no particular order, the
first one to observe is the composition pattern of adding residuals.

``` r
x2 <- x |> ...
x <- x + x2 # add residual x to x2
```

This is a common pattern that helps with model training, and especially
to help with the [vanishing gradient
problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanishing_gradient_problem). It’s
a skip-connection in the other-wise linear sequence of matrix

> transformations. It reinjects information (during the forward pass), and

Reviewer: That's a very nice explanation!

normalization layer:

``` r
x2 <- x |> norm() |> ...
x <- x + x2
```

There are many kinds of normalization layers, but to slightly
over-generalize, they can all be thought of as a stabilizer that helps
with training. Like their deep-learning cousins the regularizers, their
main function is to keep values passing through in a sensible range–in
the ball park of \[-1, 1\], typically. We’ll take a closer look at
`RMSNorm` soon.

Stripped of two tricks that are mostly there to help the model train,
residuals and normalization, the core of the `TransformerBlock` is just
this:

``` r
x |> attention() |> feed_forward()
```

In a moment we’ll see that that `feed_foward` is a slightly fancier
variation of a conventional sequence of `Dense` layer. Before we get
there we can we safely skip ahead to distill the following intuition: a
`TransformerBlock` is basically an `Attention` layer followed by a few
(fancy) dense layers, with some simple composition patterns (tricks)
that help with training. `Attention` is the heart of the model: it’s the
most interesting, and also the most involved.

With the framing in place, let’s go through and take a closer look at

> `RMSNorm`, `FeedForward` and then with the foundation in place, we’ll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RMSNorm`, `FeedForward`, and then with the foundation in place, we’ll
```

    # calculate and normalize attention scores
    scores <- q %*% k                       # (bsz, n_heads, seqlen, seqlen)
    scores <- scores / sqrt(self$head_size) # scale

    # apply causal mask, so the model can't "look ahead" during training
    mask <- make_mask(seqlen, dtype = scores$dtype)
    scores %<>% { . + mask }

    scores <- tf$nn$softmax(scores, axis = -1L)

    # adjust values tensor with attention scores
                      # scores (bsz, n_heads, seqlen, seqlen)
                      # v      (bsz, n_heads, seqlen, head_size)
    output <- scores %*% v   # (bsz, n_heads, seqlen, head_size)

    # combine heads back into a single features dim,
    # so Attention output_shape==input_shape
    output <- output |>
      tf$transpose(c(0L, 2L, 1L, 3L)) |> # (bsz, seqlen, n_heads, head_size)
      tf$reshape(tf$shape(x))            # (bsz, seqlen, n_heads * head_size)

    # one more trainable linear projection for good luck
    output <- self$wo(output) # (bsz, seqlen, n_heads * head_size)

    output
  }
}
```

`Attention` in LLaMA is similar but not identical to the Attention
described in the [original Transformers

> paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762), (and available as a keras

Reviewer: remove comma?

the balance like this at the various model sizes:

``` r
lapply(c("7B", "13B", "30B", "65B"), \(size) {
  p <- read_json(weights_path("{size}/params.json"))
  with(p, list(llama_size = size,
               n_heads = n_heads,
               head_dim = dim %/% n_heads))
}) |> dplyr::bind_rows()
```

    # A tibble: 4 × 3
      llama_size n_heads head_dim
      <chr>        <int>    <int>
    1 7B              32      128
    2 13B             40      128
    3 30B             52      128
    4 65B             64      128

Next lets turn our attention to the causal attention mask.

``` r
make_mask <- function(seqlen, dtype = k_floatx()) {
  x <- tf$range(seqlen)
  mask <- tf$where(x[, tf$newaxis] < x[tf$newaxis, ],
                   tf$constant(-Inf, dtype = dtype),
                   tf$constant(0, dtype = dtype))

  # broadcast over batch and heads dim
  mask[tf$newaxis, tf$newaxis, , ] # (1, 1, seqlen, seqlen)
}
```

The mask is a strictly upper triangular matrix filled with `-Inf`
values. Adding the mask to the attention scores prevents the model from
being able to “look ahead” and see the attention score for a token

> pairings it hasn’t seen yet at a particular position in the sequence.

Reviewer: pairings doesn't belong there right?

``` r
make_mask(seqlen = 5L)
```

    tf.Tensor(
    [[[[  0. -inf -inf -inf -inf]
       [  0.   0. -inf -inf -inf]
       [  0.   0.   0. -inf -inf]
       [  0.   0.   0.   0. -inf]
       [  0.   0.   0.   0.   0.]]]], shape=(1, 1, 5, 5), dtype=float32)

### Rotary Position Embedding

Next lets turn our attention to `apply_rotary_embedding()`. This core
innovation was published by @su2022roformer in the paper titled
["RoFormer: Enhanced Transformer with Rotary Position Embedding"](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.09864).

Some context:

-   The bare `Attention()` mechanism doesn’t leave any possibility for a
    token’s position in a sequence to affect the attention scores, since

>     only token-pairs are scored. Attention treats it’s input like a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    only token-pairs are scored. Attention treats its input like a
```

    bag-of-tokens.

-   The position of a token in a sequence is clearly important, and the
    attention layer should have access to that information.

-   The absolute position of a token in a sequence is less important
    than the relative position between tokens. (Especially so for long
    sequences).

Which leads us into the complex plane. If we imagine the features as
complex numbers, we can rotate them, and we can calculate angles between
them. From the Roformers paper:

> Specifically, incorporating the relative position embedding is
> straightforward: simply rotate the affine-transformed word embedding
> vector by amount of angle multiples of its position index and thus
> interprets the intuition behind *Rotary Position Embedding*

Expanding slightly: the rotation matrix is designed so that
subsequently, after rotating our `q` and `k` token sequence embedding
the same way, the *angle* between token features is a function of the
relative distance between those tokens in the token sequence. The

> relative angle between two tokens is invariant to the absolution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relative angle between two tokens is invariant to the absolute
```

```

    tf.Tensor([304], shape=(1), dtype=int32)

``` r
tokenizer$detokenize(next_token) |> as.character()
```

    [1] "to"

Let’s run it for a few tokens and let LLaMa finish the sentence:

``` r
prompt_tokens <- tokenizer$tokenize("The best way to attract bees")

for (i in 1:20) {

  next_token_probs <- prompt_tokens |> llama()
  next_token <- sampler(next_token_probs)

  prompt_tokens %<>% { tf$concat(c(., next_token), axis = -1L) }

  # end of sentence
  if (as.logical(next_token == tokenizer$string_to_id(".")))
    break
}

prompt_tokens |>
  tokenizer$detokenize() |>
  as.character() |>
  strwrap(60) |> writeLines()
```

    The best way to attract bees to your garden is to plant a
    variety of flowers that bloom at different times.

### Wrapping up

In this blog post we’ve walked through the LLaMA architecture
implemented in R TensorFlow, including how to load pretrained weights,
and then run the model to generate a sentence. Note, much of the code in
this blog post is tailored for didactic purposes. While the
implementation of the LLaMA architecture covered in this blog post is
appropriate for training, there are a few modifications you’ll want to

> make before doing much text generation. Those include things like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make before doing a lot of text generation. Those include things like:
```
